==================
Software standards
==================

.. _`sec:intro`:

Introduction
============

This document specifies the software standards and coding styles to be used
when writing new code files for the Met Office Unified Model. When
making **extensive** changes to an existing file a **rewrite** of the whole
file should be done to ensure that the file meets the UM coding standard and
style. **All code modifications within an existing file should follow these
standards**.

The only exception to following these coding standards is that there is no
requirement to rewrite 'imported code' to these standards before it is
included within the UM. All new code developed within the Met Office should
follow these standards.

Imported code; is developed as part of a collaboration project and then
proposed to be suitable for use within the UM; for example the original UKCA
code developed in academia. Collaborative developed code specifically for the
UM should meet these standards.

Why have standards?
-------------------

This document is intended for new as well as experienced programmers, so a few
words about why there is a need for software standards and styles may be in
order.

Coding standards specify a standard working practice for a project with the aim
of improving portability, maintainability and the readability of code. This
process makes code development and reviewing easier for all developers
involved in the project. Remember that software should be written for people
and not just for computers! As long as the syntax rules of the programming
language (e.g. Fortran IV - 2003) are followed, the computer does not care how
the code is written. You could use archaic language structures, add no
comments, leave no spaces etc. However, another programmer trying to use,
maintain or alter the code will have trouble working out what the code does
and how it does it. A little extra effort whilst writing the code can greatly
simplify the task of this other programmer (which might be the original author
a year or so after writing the code, when details of it are bound to have been
forgotten). In addition, following these standards may well help you to write
better, more efficient, programs containing fewer bugs.

While code style is very subjective, by standardising the style, UM routine
layout will become familiar to all code developers/reviewers even when they
are not familiar with the underlying science.

Units
-----

All routines and documentation must be written using SI units. Standard SI
prefixes may be used. Where relevant, the units used must be clearly stated in
both the code and the supporting UM documentation.

Working practices
-----------------

The preparation of new files and of changes to existing files should, meet this
UM standard documentation and must be developed following the stages outlined
in `Working Practices for UM Development under FCM and Git
<https://metoffice.github.io/simulation-systems>`__.

Examples
--------

This document provides an example programming unit to aid the code developer.
This example meets the standards detailed within this paper, with references
to the relevant sections.

Technical standards
-------------------

UM code should be written in and conform to the Fortran 2003 standard; this is
supported by most `major Fortran compilers
<http://fortranwiki.org/fortran/show/Fortran+2003+status>`__. Obsolescent
language features are not permitted. The UM also requires compiler support for
Technical Specification 29113 on the Further Interoperability of Fortran with
C. This is a new feature for Fortran 2018, but is a `common extension in most
compilers
<http://fortranwiki.org/fortran/show/Compiler+Support+for+Modern+Fortran>`__
and has widespread support.

Please note that in order to maximise portability and to avoid the use of
radically different design structures within single areas of code, some
Fortran 2003 features are excluded from use within the UM. For further details
please see `Appendix B`_.

.. Appendix `7 <#app:F2003>`__.

Pre-processor
-------------

In the past include files and C pre-processor were used for scientific code
section choices and passing a large list of arrays. This use has been phased
out and highly discouraged. The C pre-processor is still used to make machine
specific choices and, together with included files, to reduced code
duplication. These are all covered by this standards and style document.

.. _`sec:example`:

How to meet the coding standards
================================

The following code example exhibits all that is defined as a good coding
standard and how code should be written for inclusion within the UM.

The example is highlighted with references (section links) to the remainder of
this document which provide further details on the standard and style used.

.. parsed-literal::

    example_mod.F90                                                                     `S1`_


    ! *****************************COPYRIGHT*******************************             `S2`_
    ! (C) Crown copyright Met Office. All rights reserved.
    ! For further details please refer to the file COPYRIGHT.txt
    ! which you should have received as part of this distribution.
    ! *****************************COPYRIGHT*******************************             `S2`_
    !
    ! An example routine depicting how one should construct
    ! new code to meet the UMDP3 coding standards.                                      `S2`_
    !
    MODULE example_mod                                                      `S3`_ `S4`_ `S6`_

    IMPLICIT NONE                                                                       `S7`_

    ! Description:                                                                      `S2`_
    !   A noddy routine that illustrates the way to apply the UMDP3
    !   coding standards to help code developers
    !   pass code reviews.
    !
    ! Method:                                                                           `S2`_
    !   In this routine we apply many of the UMDP3 features
    !   to construct a simple routine. The references on the RHS take the reader
    !   to the appropriate section of the UMDP3 guide with further details.
    !
    ! Code Owner: Please refer to the UM file CodeOwners.txt                            `S2`_
    ! This file belongs in section: Control
    !
    ! Code description:                                                                 `S2`_
    !  Language: Fortran 2003.
    !  This code is written to UMDP3 standards.
    !

    CHARACTER(LEN=*), PARAMETER, PRIVATE :: ModuleName='EXAMPLE_MOD'                   `S14`_

    CONTAINS                                                                            `S1`_

    ! Subroutine Interface:
    SUBROUTINE example (xlen, ylen, l_unscale, input1, input2, &                       `S10`_
                      output, l_loud_opt)
    ! Description:
    !   Nothing further to add to module description.                                   `S2`_
    USE atmos_constants_mod,    ONLY: r                                                 `S6`_
    USE ereport_mod,            ONLY: ereport
    USE parkind1,               ONLY: jpim, jprb                                       `S14`_
    USE umprintMgr,             ONLY: umprint, ummessage, PrNorm                       `S12`_
    USE errormessagelength_mod, ONLY: errormessagelength
    USE yomhook,                ONLY: lhook, dr_hook                                   `S14`_

    IMPLICIT NONE                                                                       `S7`_

    ! Subroutine arguments
    INTEGER, INTENT(IN)  :: xlen  ! Length of first dimension of the arrays.            `S7`_
    INTEGER, INTENT(IN)  :: ylen  ! Length of second dimension of the arrays.

    LOGICAL, INTENT(IN)  :: l_unscale  ! switch scaling off.

    REAL, INTENT(IN)     :: input1(xlen, ylen) ! First input array                      `S7`_

    REAL, INTENT(IN OUT) :: input2(xlen, ylen) ! Second input array                     `S7`_
    REAL, INTENT(OUT)    :: output(xlen, ylen) ! Contains the result                    `S7`_

    LOGICAL, INTENT(IN), OPTIONAL :: l_loud_opt ! optional debug flag                   `S7`_

    ! Local variables
    INTEGER(KIND=jpim), PARAMETER :: zhook_in  = 0  ! DrHook tracing entry       `S7`_ `S14`_
    INTEGER(KIND=jpim), PARAMETER :: zhook_out = 1  ! DrHook tracing exit              `S14`_
    INTEGER :: i          ! Loop counter
    INTEGER :: j          ! Loop counter
    INTEGER :: icode      ! error code for EReport
    LOGICAL :: l_loud     ! debug flag (default false unless l_loud_opt is used)        `S7`_

    REAL, ALLOCATABLE :: field(:,:)     ! Scaling array to fill.                        `S8`_
    REAL(KIND=jprb)   :: zhook_handle   ! DrHook tracing                               `S14`_
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), PARAMETER :: RoutineName='EXAMPLE'                               `S19`_
    CHARACTER(LEN=errormessagelength) :: cmessage ! used for EReport
    CHARACTER(LEN=256) :: my_char  ! string for output

    ! End of header
    IF (lhook) CALL dr_hook(ModuleName//':'//RoutineName, zhook_in, zhook_handle)      `S14`_

    ! Set debug flag if argument is present
    l_loud = .FALSE.
    IF (PRESENT(l_loud_opt)) THEN                                                       `S7`_
      l_loud = l_loud_opt
    END IF

    my_char                                               &                            `S10`_
      =  'This is a very very very very very very very '  &
      // 'loud character assignment'   ! A pointless long character example.
    icode=0

    ! verbosity choice, output some numbers to aid with debugging                       `S5`_
    ! protected by printstatus>=PrNorm and pe=0
    WRITE(ummessage,'(A,I0)') 'xlen=', xlen                                            `S12`_
    CALL umprint(ummessage, level=PrNorm, pe=0, src='example_mod')                     `S13`_
    WRITE(ummessage,'(A,I0)') 'ylen=', ylen
    CALL umprint(ummessage, level=PrNorm, pe=0, src='example_mod')
    IF (l_loud) CALL umprint(my_char, level=PrNorm, src='example_mod')

    ! Allocate and initialise scaling array                                             `S5`_
    ! Noddy code warns user when scaling is not employed.
    IF (l_unscale) THEN                                                                 `S9`_
      icode = -100  ! set up WARNING message
      ALLOCATE(field(1,1))                                                              `S8`_
      cmessage = 'Scaling is switched off in run!'
      CALL ereport(RoutineName, icode, cmessage)                                       `S19`_
    ELSE
      ALLOCATE(field(xlen, ylen))                                                       `S8`_
      DO j = 1, ylen                                                                    `S9`_
        DO i = 1, xlen                                                                  `S9`_
          field(i, j)  = (1.0*i) + (2.0*j)                                              `S4`_
          input2(i, j) = input2(i, j) * field(i, j)
        END DO
      END DO
    END IF

    ! The main calculation of the routine, using OpenMP.                                `S5`_
    !$OMP PARALLEL DEFAULT(NONE) &                                                     `S15`_
    !$OMP SHARED(xlen, ylen, input1, input2, field, output) &
    !$OMP PRIVATE(i, j)                                                                `S15`_
    !$OMP DO SCHEDULE(STATIC)
    DO j = 1, ylen
      i_loop: DO i = 1, xlen                                                            `S9`_
        ! Calculate the Output value:
        output(i, j) = (input1(i, j) * input2(i, j))
      END DO i_loop
    END DO ! j loop
    !$OMP END DO                                                                       `S15`_
    !$OMP END PARALLEL                                                                 `S15`_

    DEALLOCATE (field)                                                                  `S8`_

    IF (lhook) CALL dr_hook(ModuleName//':'//RoutineName, zhook_out, zhook_handle)     `S14`_
    RETURN
    END SUBROUTINE example                                                              `S4`_

    END MODULE example_mod                                                              `S4`_



.. _`sec:general`:

UM programming standards; Code Layout, Formatting, Style and Fortran features
=============================================================================

This section outlines the programming standards you should adhere to when
developing code for inclusion within the Unified Model. The rules set out in
this section aim to improve code readability and ensure that UM code is
compatible with both the Fortran 2003 standard and FCM.


.. _`S1`:

S1. Source files should only contain a single program unit
----------------------------------------------------------

- Modules may be used to group related variables, subroutines and functions.
  Each separate file within the source tree should be uniquely named.

- The name of the file should reflect the name of the programming unit.
  Multiple versions of the same file should be named ``filename-#ver`` where
  ``#ver`` is the section/version number (e.g. 1a,2a,2b…). For example:

  - ``<filename-#ver>.F90`` when writing a ``<subroutine>``

  - ``<filename_mod-#ver>.F90`` with writing a ``<module_mod>``

  - ``<existing filename>.F90`` with ``<module_mod>`` only if upgrading
    existing subroutine since Subversion does not handle renaming of files
    very well and this allows history of the file to be easily retrieved.

  This makes it easier to navigate the UM code source tree for given routines.

- You should avoid naming your **program units** and **variables** with names
  that match an intrinsic ``FUNCTION``, ``SUBROUTINE`` or ``MODULE``. We
  recommend the use of unique names within a program unit.

- You should also avoid naming your program units and variables with names that
  match a keyword in a Fortran statement.

- Avoid giving program units names that are likely to be used as variable names
  elsewhere in the code, e.g. ``field`` or ``string``. This makes searching
  the code difficult and can cause the code browser to make erroneous
  connections between unrelated routines.

- Subroutines should be kept reasonably short, where appropriate, say up to
  about 100 lines of executable code, but don't forget there are start up
  overheads involved in calling an external subroutine so they should do a
  reasonable amount of work.


.. _`S2`:

S2. Headers
-----------

- All programming units require a suitable copyright header. Met Office derived
  code should use the standard UM copyright header as depicted in the good
  example code. Collaborative UM developed code may require alternative
  headers as agreed in the collaborative agreements. e.g. UKCA code. The IPR
  (intellectual property rights) of UM code is important and needs to be
  protected appropriately.

- Headers are an immensely important part of any code as they document what it
  does, and how it does it. You should write as much of the header as possible
  BEFORE writing the code, as this will focus your mind on what you are doing
  and how you intend to do it!

- The description of the ``MODULE`` and its contained ``SUBROUTINE`` may be the
  same and thus it need not be repeated in the latter. If a ``MODULE``
  contains more than one subroutine then further descriptions are required.

- History comments should not be included in the header or routine code. FCM
  TRAC provides the history of our codes.

- Code author names should NOT be included explicitly within the code as they
  quickly become out of date and are sometimes misleading. Instead we
  reference a single maintainable text file which is included within the UM
  code repository.

  ::

     ! Code Owner: Please refer to the UM file CodeOwners.txt
     ! This file belongs in section: <section_name_to_be_entered>

- Example UM templates are provided with the source of this document;
  subroutine, function and module templates.


.. _`S3`:

S3. Free source form
--------------------

- All code should be written using the free source form.

- Please restrict code to 80 columns, so that your code can be easily viewed on
  any editor and screen and can be printed easily on A4 paper.
  *Note that CreateBC uses a limit of 100 columns, due to the nature of
  the object-orientated code.*

- Never put more than one statement on a line.

- Write your program in UK English, unless you have a very good reason for not
  doing so. Write your comments in simple UK English and name your program
  units and variables based on sensible UK English words. Always bear in mind
  that your code may be read by people who are not proficient English
  speakers.


.. _`S4`:

S4. Fortran style
-----------------

- To improve readability, write your code using the ALL CAPS Fortran keywords
  approach. The rest of the code may be written in either lower-case with
  underscores or CamelCase. This approach has the advantage that Fortran
  keywords stand out.

- To improve readability, you should always use the optional space to separate
  the Fortran keywords. The full list of Fortran keywords with an optional
  spaces is:

  ::

     ELSE IF            END DO             END FORALL         END FUNCTION
     END IF             END INTERFACE      END MODULE         END PROGRAM
     END SELECT         END SUBROUTINE     END TYPE           END WHERE
     SELECT CASE        ELSE WHERE         DOUBLE PRECISION   END ASSOCIATE
     END BLOCK          END BLOCK DATA     END ENUM           END FILE
     END PROCEDURE      GO TO              IN OUT             SELECT TYPE

  Note that not all of these are approved or appropriate for use in UM code.
  This rule also applies to OpenMP keywords. (See: `3.15 <#OpenMP>`__)

- The full version of ``END`` should be used at all times, eg ``END SUBROUTINE
  <name>`` and ``END FUNCTION <name>``

- New code should be written using Fortran 95/2003 features. Avoid non-portable
  vendor/compiler extensions.

- When writing a ``REAL`` literal with an integer value, put a 0 after the
  decimal point (i.e. 1.0 as opposed to 1.) to improve readability.

- Avoid using obsolescent features of the Fortran language, instead make use of
  F95/2003 alternatives. For example, statement functions are among the list
  of deprecated features in the F95 standard and these can be replaced by
  ``FUNCTION``\ s within appropriate ``MODULE``\ s.

- Do not use archaic forms of intrinsic functions. For example, ``LOG
  ()`` should be used in place of ``ALOG()``, ``MAX()`` instead of ``AMAX1
  ()``, ``REAL()`` instead of ``FLOAT()`` etc.

- Never use the ``PAUSE`` statement.

- Never use the ``STOP`` statement, see `S19`_

- The standard delimiter for namelists is :math:`\slash`. In particular, note
  that ``&END`` is non-standard and should be avoided. For further information
  on namelists please refer to `4.1 <#sec:namelists>`__

- Only use the generic names of intrinsic functions, avoid the use of
  'hardware' specific intrinsic functions. Use the latter if an only if
  there is an optimisation benefit and then it must be protected by a
  platform specific CPP flag `S17`_.

# .. _`sec:comments`:

.. _`S5`:

S5. Comments and white spacing
------------------------------

- Always comment code!

- Start comments with a single '!'. The indention of whole line comments should
  match that of the code.

- Use spaces and blank lines where appropriate to format your code to improve
  readability.

- Never use tabs within UM code as the tab character is not in the Fortran
  character set. If your editor inserts tabs automatically, you should
  configure it to switch off the functionality when you are editing Fortran
  source files.

- Line up your statements, where appropriate, to improve readability.

# .. _`sec:modules`:

.. _`S6`:

S6. The use of modules
----------------------

MODULEs are strongly encouraged as the mainstay of future UM code program
units; making use of the implicit ``INTERFACE`` checking and removing the need
for the ``!DEPENDS ON``. Argument lists within ``SUBROUTINE`` ``CALLs`` may
also shorten.

- You are expected to ``USE <module>, ONLY : <variables>`` and variables should
  be imported from the module in which they were originally declared thus
  enabling a code audit trail of variables around the UM code.

- For code portability, be careful not to ``USE <module>`` twice in a routine
  for the same MODULE, especially where using ``ONLY``. This can lead to
  compiler Warning and Error messages.

- Where possible, module variables and procedures should be declared PRIVATE.
  This avoids unnecessary export of symbols, promotes data hiding and may also
  help the compiler to optimise the code.

- The use of derived types is encouraged, to group related variables and their
  use within Modules.

- Review your use of arguments within subroutine calls, could some be
  simplified by using Modules?

- Before writing your Module, check the UM source that no one has already
  created a Module to do what you want. For example do not declare a new
  variable/parameter without checking if it is already available in a suitable
  UM module.

- Global type constants (e.g. :math:`g` and :math:`\pi`) should be maintained
  at a high level within the UM code and not duplicated within modules at the
  code section level; ``USE <insert global consts module name here>`` instead.
  Only section specific constants should be maintained at the section level.

- When calling another Subroutine or an External Function the use of
  "``! DEPENDS ON``" directive is required within the Unified Model prior to
  the ``CALL`` unless the Subroutine or Function is wrapped within a Module;
  thus USE it,

  ::

     ! DEPENDS ON: gather_field_gcom
     CALL gather_field_gcom(local_field,    global_field,       &
                            local_row_len,  local_rows,         &
                            global_row_len, global_rows,        &
                            grid_type,      halo_type,          &
                            gather_pe,      proc_group,         &
                            icode,          cmessage)

- Avoid the introduction of additional ``COMMON`` blocks. Developers
  should now be using ``MODULE``\ s.

# .. _`sec:declare`:

.. _`S7`:

S7. Argument and variable declaration
-------------------------------------

- Use IMPLICIT NONE in all program units. This forces you to declare all your
  variables explicitly. This helps to reduce bugs in your program that will
  otherwise be difficult to track.

- Use meaningful variable names to aid code comprehension.

- Variables should not use Fortran keywords or intrinsic functions for their
  name. For example, a variable should not be named ``size``, because there is
  already a Fortran intrinsic function called ``SIZE()``

- For the purposes of variable naming, "Fortran keywords or intrinsic
  functions" shall refer to the set of all keywords and functions, from all
  Fortran Standard versions (including all past and future versions, not just
  Fortran 2003). For, example, the ``ASSIGN`` keyword was deleted in Fortran
  95, but ``assign`` still should not be used as a variable name.

- All variables must be declared, and commented with a brief description. This
  increases understandability and reduces errors caused by misspellings of
  variables.

- Use ``INTENT`` in declaring arguments as this allows for checks to be done at
  compile time.

- Arguments should be declared separately from local variables.

- Subroutine arguments should be declared in the same order in the header as
  they appear in the subroutine statement. This order is not random but is
  determined by intent, variable dimensions and variable type. All input
  arguments come first, followed by all input/output arguments and then all
  output arguments. The exception being any ``OPTIONAL`` arguments which
  should be appended to the end of the argument list. If more than one
  ``OPTIONAL`` argument is used then one should also use keywords so that the
  ``OPTIONAL`` arguments are not tied to a specific 'position' near the end of
  the argument list.

- As ``OPTIONAL`` arguments are possible when using ``MODULE``\ s (an interface
  is required) there is no requirement in future for DUMMY arguments and glue
  routines.

- It is recommended that one uses local variables in routines which are set to
  the values of optional arguments in the code if present, otherwise a default
  value is used. This removes the requirement to always use ``PRESENT`` when
  using the optional argument.

- Within each section of the header, variables of a given type should be
  grouped together. These groups must be declared in the order ``INTEGER``,
  ``REAL``, ``LOGICAL`` and then ``CHARACTER``, with each grouping separated
  by a blank line. In general variables should be declared one per line. Use a
  separate type statement for each line as this makes it easier to copy code
  around (you can always use the editor to repeat a line to save typing the
  type statement again) and prevents you from running out of continuation
  lines.

- If an array is dimensioned by another variable, ensure that the variable is
  declared first.

- The ``EXTERNAL`` statement should not be used for subroutines although it is
  allowed for functions, again for code portability.

- Avoid the ``DIMENSION`` attribute or statement. Declare the dimension with
  the declared variables which improves readability.

  Common practice

  ::

     INTEGER, DIMENSION(10,20) :: a, b, c

  Better approach

  ::

     INTEGER :: a(10, 20), b(10, 20), c(10, 20)


- Initialisation in the declaration of a variable should only be done after
  considering whether it is to be only initialised on the first encounter of
  the variable or not. Fortran automatically adds ``SAVE`` to the declaration
  attribute to this type of initialisation. This is especially important in
  OpenMP and when you expect the variable to be reset everytime the routine is
  entered. ``POINTER``\s are also affected so please be aware of the
  effects.

- Character strings must be declared with a length when stored in an array.

- If an argument list has a dummy argument that makes use of incoming data
  (whether or not it has an explicit ``INTENT``) and another argument
  explicitly declared ``INTENT(OUT)``, do not use the same variable as the
  actual argument to both dummy arguments ("aliasing"). Some compilers will
  reinitialise all ``INTENT(OUT)`` variables on entry, destroying the incoming
  data.

  Example subroutine:

  ::

     SUBROUTINE foo(m,n)
     REAL, INTENT(IN)  :: m
     REAL, INTENT(OUT) :: n

  Bad practice:

  ::

     CALL foo(a,a)

  Safe approach:

  ::

     b = a
     CALL foo(b,a)

#.. _`sec:allocate`:

.. _`S8`:

S8. Allocatables
----------------

- When Allocating and deallocating, use a separate ALLOCATE and DEALLOCATE
  statement for each array.

- When using the ``ALLOCATE`` statement, ensure that any arrays passed to
  subroutines have been allocated, even if it's anticipated that they won't be
  used.

  ::

     IF (L_mcr_qrain) THEN
       ALLOCATE ( mix_rain_phys2(1-offx:row_length+offx,         &
                                 1-offy:rows+offy, wet_levels)
     ELSE
       ALLOCATE ( mix_rain_phys2(1,1,1) )
     END IF

     ! DEPENDS ON: q_to_mix
     CALL do_something(row_length, rows, wet_levels,             &
                       offx,offy, mix_rain_phys2   )

- To prevent memory fragmentation ensure that allocates and deallocates match
  in reverse order.

  ::

     ALLOCATE ( A(row_length,rows,levels) )
     ALLOCATE ( B(row_length,rows,levels) )
     ALLOCATE ( C(row_length,rows,levels) )
     ....
     DEALLOCATE ( C )
     DEALLOCATE ( B )
     DEALLOCATE ( A )

- Where possible, an ALLOCATE statement for an ALLOCATABLE array (or a POINTER
  used as a dynamic array) should be coupled with a DEALLOCATE within the same
  scope. If an ALLOCATABLE array is a PUBLIC MODULE variable, it is highly
  desirable for its memory allocation and deallocation to be only performed in
  procedures within the MODULE in which it is declared. You may consider
  writing specific SUBROUTINEs within the MODULE to handle these memory
  managements.

- Always define a POINTER before using it. You can define a POINTER in its
  declaration by pointing it to the intrinsic function NULL() (also see advice
  in `S7`_). Alternatively, you can make sure that your POINTER is defined or
  nullified early on in the program unit. Similarly, NULLIFY a POINTER when it
  is no longer in use, either by using the NULLIFY statement or by pointing
  your POINTER to NULL().

- New operators can be defined within an ``INTERFACE`` block.

- ``ASSOCIATED`` should only be done on initialised pointers.
  Uninitialised pointers are undefined and ``ASSOCIATED`` can have
  different effects on different platforms.

# .. _`sec:blocks`:

.. _`S9`:

S9. Code IF blocks, DO LOOPs, and other constructs
--------------------------------------------------

- The use of comments is required for both large ``DO`` loops and large
  ``IF`` blocks; those spanning 15 lines or more, see `S5`_.

- Indent blocks of code by 2 characters.

- Use the newer forms of the relational operators for LOGICAL
  comparisons:

  ::

     == instead of .EQ.
     /= instead of .NE.
     >  instead of .GT.
     <  instead of .LT.
     >= instead of .GE. (do not use =>)
     <= instead of .LE. (do not use =<)

- Positive logic is usually easier to understand. When using an IF-ELSE-END IF
  construct you should use positive logic in the IF test, provided that the
  positive and the negative blocks are about the same length.

  Common practice

  ::

     IF (my_var /= some_value) THEN
       CALL do_this()
     ELSE
       CALL do_that()
     END IF

  Better approach

  ::

     IF (my_var == some_value) THEN
       CALL do_that()
     ELSE
       CALL do_this()
     END IF

- Where appropriate, simplify your LOGICAL assignments, for example:

  .. container:: samepage

     Common practice

     ::

        IF (my_var == some_value) THEN
          something      = .TRUE.
          something_else = .FALSE.
        ELSE
          something      = .FALSE.
          something_else = .TRUE.
        END IF
        ! ...
        IF (something .EQV. .TRUE.) THEN
          CALL do_something()
          ! ...
        END IF

  .. container:: samepage

     Better approach

     ::

        something      = (my_var == some_value)
        something_else = (my_var /= some_value)
        ! ...
        IF (something) THEN
          CALL do_something()
          ! ...
        END IF

- Avoid the use of 'magic numbers' that is numeric constants hard wired into
  the code. These are very hard to maintain and obscure the function of the
  code. It is much better to assign the 'magic number' to a variable or
  constant with a meaningful name and then to use this throughout the code. In
  many cases the variable will be assigned in a top level control routine and
  passed down via a include file or module. This ensures that all subroutines
  will use the correct value of the numeric constant and that alteration of it
  in one place will be propagated to all its occurrences. Unless the value
  needs to be alterable whilst the program is running (e.g. is altered via I/O
  such as a namelist) the assignment should be made using a ``PARAMETER``
  statement.

  .. container:: samepage

     Poor Practice

     ::

        IF (ObsType == 3) THEN

  .. container:: samepage

     Better Approach

     ::

        ...specify in the header local constant section....

        INTEGER, PARAMETER :: SurfaceWind = 3 !No. for surface wind

        ...and then use in the logical code...

        IF (ObsType == SurfaceWind) THEN

- Similarly avoid the use of 'magic logicals' in CALLs to subroutines. Such use
  makes the code less readable and developers are required to look at the
  called subroutine to find what has been set to either ``.TRUE.`` or
  ``.FALSE.``.

  .. container:: samepage

     Poor Practice

     ::

        CALL Phys(.FALSE.,.TRUE.,icode)

  .. container:: samepage

     Better Approach

     ::

        ...specify in the header local constant section....
        ...meaningful logical names, perhaps base them on what is used in the called subroutine

        LOGICAL, PARAMETER ::  bl_is_off = .FALSE.
        LOGICAL, PARAMETER ::  conv_is_on = .TRUE.

        ...and then use in the relevant subroutine calls...

        CALL Phys(bl_is_off, conv_is_on, icode)

- **Be careful** when comparing real numbers using ==. To avoid problems
  related to machine precision, a threshold on the difference between the
  two numbers is often preferable, e.g.

  .. container:: samepage

     Common practice

     ::

        IF ( real1 == real2 ) THEN
          ...
        END IF

  .. container:: samepage

     Better approach

     ::

        IF ( ABS(real1 - real2) < small_number ) THEN
          ...
        END IF

  where small_number is some suitably small number. In most cases, a suitable
  value for small_number can be obtained using the Fortran intrinsic functions
  ``EPSILON`` or ``TINY``.

  **The UM perturbation sensitivity project is currently in the process of
  identifying coding issues that lead to excessive perturbation growth in
  the model. Currently, all problems are emerging at IF tests that contain
  comparisons between real numbers. Typical, real case UM examples of what
  can go wrong are detailed in appendix** `8 <#app:Rounding>`__ **of this
  document.**

- Loops *must* terminate with an ``END DO`` statement. To improve the clarity
  of program structure you are encouraged to add labels or comments to the
  ``DO`` and ``END DO`` statements.

  ::

     DO i = 1, 100
       j_loop: DO j = 1, 10
         DO k = 1, 10
           ...code statements...
         END DO ! k
       END DO j_loop
     END DO ! outer loop i

- ``EXIT`` statements *must* be labelled. This is both for clarity, and to
  ensure consistency of behaviour. (The semantics of the ``EXIT`` statement
  changes between revisions of the Fortran standard.)

  ::

     i_loop: DO i = 1, 10
       IF (i>3) EXIT i_loop
     END DO i_loop

- Avoid the use of the ``GO TO`` statement.

  - The only acceptable use of ``GO TO`` is to jump to the end of a routine
    after the detection of an error, in which case you must use ``9999`` as
    the label (then everyone will understand what ``GO TO 9999`` means).

  - UM Error reporting guidance is detailed in `S19`_

- Avoid assigned ``GO TO``, computed ``GO TO``, arithmetic ``IF``, etc. Use the
  appropriate modern constructs such as ``IF``, ``WHERE``, ``SELECT CASE``,
  etc..

- Where possible, consider using ``CYCLE``, ``EXIT`` or a ``WHERE`` construct
  to simplify complicated ``DO`` loops.

- Be aware that logic in ``IF`` conditions can be performed in any order. So
  checking that array is greater than lower bound and using that index is not
  safe.

  Common approach

  ::

     DO j = 1, rows
       DO i = 1, row_length
         IF (cloud_level(i,j) > 0 .AND. cloud(i,j,cloud_level(i,j)) == 0.0) THEN
           cloud(i,j,cloud_level(i,j)) = 1.0
         END IF
       END DO
     END DO

  Better approach

  ::

     DO j = 1, rows
       DO i = 1, row_length
         IF (cloud_level(i,j) > 0) THEN
           IF (cloud(i,j,cloud_level(i,j)) == 0.0) THEN
             cloud(i,j,cloud_level(i,j)) = 1.0
           END IF
         END IF
       END DO
     END DO

- Array initialisations and literals should use the ``[]`` form rather than the
  ``(//)`` form. For example:

  ::

     INTEGER :: i_array(3) = [1,2,3]

# .. _`sec:contd`:

.. _`S10`:

S10. Line continuation
----------------------

- The only symbol to be used as a continuation line marker is '``&``' at the
  end of a line. It is suggested that you align these continuation markers to
  aid readability. Do not add a second '``&``' to the beginning of the next
  line. This advice also applies to blocks of Fortran code protected by the
  OpenMP sentinel '``!$``'. The only currently allowed exception is to
  continuation lines used with OpenMP directives, i.e. '``!$OMP``', where
  the '``&``' marker may optionally be used. Please see section `S15`_ for
  more advice on OpenMP.

- Short and simple Fortran statements are easier to read and understand than
  long and complex ones. Where possible, avoid using continuation lines in a
  statement.

- Try to avoid string continuations and spread the string across multiple lines
  using concatenations (``//``) instead.

- When calling functions or subroutines, ensure the left parenthesis is on the
  same line as the subprogram's name, and not after a continuation marker.
  This helps the code browser to parse the source tree correctly.

# .. _`sec:fortio`:

.. _`S11`:

S11. Fortran I/O
----------------

- When calling ``OPEN``, ensure that the ``ACTION`` argument is specified. In
  particular, ``ACTION='READ'`` shall be used for files that are opened only
  for reading as this reduces file locking costs.

- Don't check for the existence of a file by using ``INQUIRE`` if the only
  action you'll take if the file doesn't exist is to report an error. Rather
  use ``OPEN( ... , IOSTAT=icode, IOMSG=iomessage)`` and include the
  ``iomessage`` in an error message if ``icode`` is non-zero. This will
  capture a wider range of errors with fewer filesystem metadata accesses.


.. _`S12`:

S12. Formatting and output of text
----------------------------------

Writing output to the "stdout" stream, commonly unit 6 in fortran must use the
provided API, which is accesible by including ``USE umPrintMgr`` in the
calling code.

- Single string output should be written as

  ::

     CALL umprint('Hello',src='routine_name')

  where 'routine_name' is the name of the current subroutine or function.
  Routines which implement DrHook (section `S14`_) will already have a
  :literal:`PARAMETER \`RoutineName'` which can be used for this
  purpose.

- Multi-component output must first be written to an internal file via
  ``WRITE`` statement. The ``umPrintMgr`` module provides a convenient string
  for this purpose; ``umMessage``, though you may use your own.

  ::

     WRITE (ummessage,'(A,I0,A)') 'I am ', age, ' years old'
     CALL umprint(ummessage,src='routine_name')

- Avoid the use of ``WRITE (ummessage,*)``

- Always add formatting information to your write statements. It is important
  to ensure that the output message fits within the space given. Some
  compilers will pad unformatted values with leading blanks, which can greatly
  increase the width of any output. Writes to internal files may cause the
  program to abort if the message is longer than the string provided.

- Use dynamic-width edit descriptors where possible, to avoid truncating
  strings or failing to print integer or real values correctly:

  - Use ``A`` for character input and output, rather than e.g. ``A7``.

  - Use ``I0`` for integer output, rather than e.g. ``I3``.

  - Use ``F0.``\ :math:`n` for real output, rather than e.g.
    ``F14.``\ :math:`n`. Other real edit descriptors such as ``E``, ``EN`` and
    ``ES`` can also be used but do not accept a 0 field width.

  This is particularly important in any routine where missing data indicators
  may be present, which will typically require a much larger width than other
  data.

- The character variable ``newline`` (from the ``umPrintmgr`` module) is
  recognised as a newline if embedded in the string passed to ``umPrint``.

- The total line length should not exceed 80 characters. Use ``newline`` or
  separate calls to ``umprint`` to keep long messages easily readable.

- ``CHARACTER`` values should not contain vertical space, nor should edit
  descriptors be used for carriage control. Use ``newline`` to control
  vertical space:

  ::

     WRITE(ummessage, '(A)') newline // 'This should stand out.' // newline
     CALL umprint(ummessage,src='routine_name')

- Calls to ``umPrint`` should be protected by a suitable setting of the
  PrintStatus variable, see `S13`_ either with conditional logic or an
  additional ``level`` argument,

  ::

     CALL umprint(ummessage,src='routine_name',level=PrOper)

- If your output is not required from each processor protect the ``umPrint``
  either with logic, or an additional ``pe`` argument, for example,

  ::

     ! We'll only output at diagnostic level on pe0
     CALL umprint(ummessage,src='routine_name',level=PrDiag,pe=0)

- Never use a ``FORMAT`` statement: they require the use of labels, and obscure
  the meaning of the I/O statement. The formatting information can be placed
  explicitly within the ``READ``, ``WRITE`` or ``PRINT`` statement, or be
  assigned to a ``CHARACTER`` variable in a ``PARAMETER`` statement in the
  header of the routine for later use in I/O statements. Never place output
  text within the format specifier: i.e. only format information may be placed
  within the ``FMT=`` part of an I/O statement, all variables and literals,
  including any character literals, must be 'arguments' of the I/O routine
  itself. This improves readability by clearly separating what is to be
  read/written from how to read/write it.

  Common practice

  ::

           WRITE(Cmessage,                                                 &
          &    `("Cannot run with decomposition ",I3," x ",I3,             &
          &      " (",I3,") processors. ",                                 &
          &      "Maxproc is ",I3," processors.")')                        &
          &       nproc_EW,nproc_NS,nproc_EW*nproc_NS,Maxproc

  Better approach

  ::

            WRITE(cmessage,'(4(A,I0),A)')                                 &
               `Cannot run with decomposition ',nproc_ew,`x',nproc_ns,    &
               `(',nproc_ew*nproc_ns,') processors. Maxproc is `,maxproc, &
               ` processors.'

- In order to flush output buffers, the routine ``umprintflush`` should be used
  for "stdout" written via ``umprint`` and ``UM_FORT_FLUSH`` for data writtent
  to any other fortran unit. These routines abstract flush operations
  providing a portable interface. These are the only method of flushing that
  should be used.


.. _`S13`:

S13. PrintStatus
----------------

There are four different settings of PrintStatus used in the UM, each of which
is assigned a numeric value. There is a shorter form available for each one.
These are defined as ``PARAMETER``\ s and so can be tested using constructs
similar to:

::

   IF (PrintStatus >= PrStatus_Normal) THEN

For "stdout", they can also be provided as an argument to ``umprint``. The
current value of PrintStatus is stored in the variable ``PrintStatus`` in the
aforementioned module, and set using the gui and/or input namelist. Note that
the utility executables operate at a fixed value of ``PrintStatus`` and that
output choices in code shared with these utilities will impact their
behaviour.

The different settings are:

- ``PrStatus_Min`` or ``PrMin`` - This setting is intended to produce minimal
  output and should hence be only used for output which is required in every
  run. Users running with this setting should expect to have to rerun with a
  more verbose setting to diagnose any problems. Fatal error messages should
  fall into this category, but otherwise it should not generally be used by
  developers.

- ``PrStatus_Normal`` or ``PrNorm`` - The "standard" setting of PrintStatus.
  Messages with this setting should be important for all users in every run.
  Information output using this setting should summarise the situation - more
  detailed information should be protected by ``PrStatus_Diag`` instead.

- ``PrStatus_Oper`` or ``PrOper``- Slightly more detailed than
  ``PrStatus_Normal``, this is intended for messages which are not required
  for research users but are needed when running operationally.

- ``PrStatus_Diag`` or or ``PrDiag`` - The most verbose option, all messages
  which do not fall into one of the above categories should use this setting.
  Non-essential, detailed information about values of variables, status
  messages, etc should be included in this category. If a developer adds code
  to assist debugging problems, it should also be protected by
  ``PrStatus_Diag``.


.. _`S14`:

S14. DrHook
-----------

DrHook is a library written by ECMWF which can produce run-time information
such as:

- Per-routine profiling information based on walltime, CPU-time and MFlops.

- Tracebacks in the event of code failure. A developer can force a traceback at
  any point in the code with an appropriate call to the DrHook library.

- Memory usage information.

For DrHook to be effective, calls to the library are needed in each individual
subroutine. DrHook must be called:

#. At the start of each routine, before any other executable code.

#. At each exit point from the routine; not only at the end, but just before
   any other ``RETURN`` statements.

When adding DrHook to a routine, the following rules should be followed:

- Routines contained in modules should include the name of the module in the
  call to DrHook, colon-separated. E.g. ``'MODULE_NAME:ROUTINE_NAME'``.

- All names should be in capitals.

The necessary instrumentation code and the recommended method of implementing
it is shown below.

::

    CHARACTER(LEN=*), PARAMETER, PRIVATE :: ModuleName = 'MODULE_NAME'

    CONTAINS
    ...

    USE parkind1, ONLY: jpim, jprb
    USE yomhook,  ONLY: lhook, dr_hook

    ...
    CHARACTER(LEN=*), PARAMETER :: RoutineName = 'ROUTINE_NAME'

    INTEGER(KIND=jpim), PARAMETER :: zhook_in  = 0
    INTEGER(KIND=jpim), PARAMETER :: zhook_out = 1
    REAL(KIND=jprb)               :: zhook_handle

    IF (lhook) CALL dr_hook(ModuleName//':'//RoutineName,zhook_in,zhook_handle)

    ...

    IF (lhook) CALL dr_hook(ModuleName//':'//RoutineName,zhook_out,zhook_handle)

The example subroutine shown in `2 <#sec:example>`__ demonstrates DrHook
instrumentation.

Calls to DrHook add a very small overhead to the code, and so should normally
only be added to routines that do a non-trivial amount of work. Adding DrHook
calls to very small routines may represent a large increase in the workload of
those routines, and furthermore if those routines are called many thousands of
times during a single run of the UM then this will generate large amounts of
duplicate data. The developer and reviewer may decide it is unnecessary to
include DrHook calls in such routines.

Note that there is no benefit to adding DrHook calls to a module that consists
only of Fortran declarations and lacks any executable code.

DrHook calls should *not* be added to ``RECURSIVE`` routines as they are likely
to cause runtime errors.


.. _`S15`:

S15. OpenMP
-----------

OpenMP is a very powerful technology for introducing shared memory parallelism
to a code, but it does have some potential for confusion. To help minimise
this, the following should be adhered to,

- Only use the OpenMP 3.1 standard. Support for OpenMP 4.0 is not yet
  widespread, and implementations are somewhat immature.

- Only use the ``!$OMP`` version of the directive and start at beginning of the
  line (see previous general guidance on sentinels).

- Never rely on the default behaviour for ``SHARED`` or ``PRIVATE`` variables.
  The use of ``DEFAULT(NONE)`` is preferred, with the type of all variables
  explicitly specified. A different ``DEFAULT`` may be allowed if the number
  of variables is very large (i.e. dozens).

- Parameters by default are shared. To make this obvious it is helpful to list
  parameters used in the OMP block as a Fortran comment just before the
  ``PARALLEL`` region.

- Always use explicit ``!$OMP END DO`` - don't rely on implicit rules.

- Unlike ``SINGLE`` regions, ``MASTER`` regions do not carry an implicit
  barrier at the end. Please add an ``!$OMP BARRIER`` directive immediately
  after ``!$OMP END MASTER`` directives. Barriers may be omitted for
  performance reasons if it is safe to do so.

- Calls to OpenMP functions and module use should be protected by the OpenMP
  sentinel. That is, the line should start with ``!$`` and a space. No other
  comment line should start with this combination.

- Always specify the scheduler to be used for DO loops, since the default is
  implementation specific. A common default is STATIC. This is normally fine
  but can cause problems within certain cases.

- As with non-OpenMP code, you should always use the optional space to separate
  the OpenMP keywords to improve readability. For example, ``PARALLELDO``
  should become ``PARALLEL DO``. (See also: `S4`_)

- Any use of a sentinel (including OpenMP) should start at the beginning of the
  line, e.g.

  The following correctly uses the ``!$OMP`` sentinel at the beginning of the
  line.

  ::

         IF (do_loop) THEN
     !$OMP PARALLEL DO PRIVATE(i)
           DO i = 1, 100
           ...
           END DO
     !$OMP PARALLEL DO
         END IF

  Whilst the following can lead to compilers not using the lines starting with
  ``!$OMP`` sentinel.

  ::

         IF (do_loop) THEN
           !$OMP PARALLEL DO PRIVATE(i)
           DO i = 1, 100
           ...
           END DO
           !$OMP PARALLEL DO
         END IF

- Careful use of the OpenMP reduction clauses is required as we want to try and
  preserve bit-comparison across different threads. This is not guaranteed
  with some ``REDUCTION`` clauses.

- OpenMP directives in C code must be protected by both a
  ``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS`` and an ``_OPENMP`` if-def. This
  ensures it is possible to select the use of only the Fortran OpenMP runtime
  library, which can prevent incompatibilities between different libraries. If
  possible, provide a Fortran implementation of the OpenMP parallelism as
  well, using the wrappers in the ``thread_utils`` module from SHUMlib.
  (Further rules apply; see `4.6.5 <#sec:OpenMPinC>`__ for more information on
  using OpenMP with C.)


.. _`S16`:

S16. MPI
--------

The Unified Model depends on the GCOM library for communications. GCOM has only
modest functionality however so the use of MPI is permitted providing the
following principles are adhered to:

- Only use MPI via GCOM's MPL interface layer. MPI libraries can be found that
  support only 32-bit argument or only 64-bit arguments. MPL is designed to
  abstract this issue away.

- Only use functionality from versions of MPI up to 3.1. These have widespread
  support.


.. _`S17`:

S17. Preprocessing
------------------

Use of preprocessor directives should only be used when its inclusion can be
justified, e.g. machine dependent options or reducing duplication of a large
code section, see `S18`_.

Do not use preprocessing directives (``#if``, ``#include``, ``#endif``) for
selecting science code section versions. Do not use ``#include`` directive to
pass a large list of arrays or to pass common items.

In particular:

- "Must" use ``#if defined`` rather than ``#if``. If the CPP flag does not
   exist the pre-processor evaluates the test to true.

- Use run-time rather than compile time switches

- Do not replicate run-time switches with compile-time ones, so avoid

  ::

         #if defined(OCEAN)
           IF (submodel == ocean) THEN
         #endif
         ...
         #if defined(OCEAN)
           END IF
         #endif

- Do not add optional arguments to subroutines protected by directives, instead
  migrate to FORTRAN 95/2003 code and make use of OPTIONAL argument
  functionality.

- Put ``#if`` lines inside included files rather than around the ``#include``
  itself.

- Use directive names that clearly indicate their purpose.

- When removing scientific sections, remove variables that were only needed for
  that section.

- Do not wrap a routine within CPP flags. Let FCM work out when it is
  required.

- Please refrain from using consecutive question marks (``??``) in the source
  code as some preprocessors can interpret them as C trigraphs.


.. _`S18`:

S18. Code duplication
---------------------

In the case of a large area of code that needs to be duplicated, e.g. same
computation applied to different types, then the use of the ``#include``
preprocessing directive is recommended by adhering the following rules:

- Only one include file per routine. If a routine needs multiple include files,
  consider dividing the routine into small multiple routines. The same include
  file cannot be used in multiple modules or routines. Consider creating a
  special routine with the shared code if needed.

- Use ``*.h`` as a file extension for ``#include`` files since the FCM make
  system will automatically recognise it.

- File name should always be ``modulename_routinename.h``. An accepted
  exception is when the module name and the routine name are the same, e.g.
  instead of ``routine_mod_routine.h`` use ``routine.h``.

- The include file should be located in a special ``include`` sub-directory
  where the Fortran module is located.

- An include file should only be used for reducing code duplication, not for
  performance reason. Let the compiler implement proper in-lining.

The following code shows an example on how to use the ``#include``
preprocessing directive inside a module to reduce code duplication.

- The module file ``my_mod.F90`` in the ``src/path/to/mod`` directory with the
  duplicated routines:

  ::

     INTERFACE calc_1
         MODULE PROCEDURE calc_1_32bit,calc_1_64bit
     END INTERFACE

     SUBROUTINE calc_1_32bit(r,n,d)
     IMPLICIT NONE
     INTEGER, PARAMETER :: prec = real32

     #include "my_mod_calc_1.h"

     END SUBROUTINE

     SUBROUTINE calc_1_64bit(r,n,d)
     IMPLICIT NONE
     INTEGER, PARAMETER :: prec = real64

     #include "my_mod_calc_1.h"

     END SUBROUTINE

- The included file ``my_mod_calc_1.h`` in the ``src/path/to/mod/include``
  directory with the shared code:

  ::

     ! --- Begin shared body of calc_1 ---
     REAL(KIND=prec), INTENT(OUT) :: r
     REAL(KIND=prec), INTENT(IN)  :: n
     REAL(KIND=prec), INTENT(IN)  :: d

     r = n / d
     ! --- End shared body of calc_1 ---


.. _`S19`:

S19. Error reporting
--------------------

The most important rule in error reporting is *never* to ``CALL abort`` or to
use ``STOP``; these can cause problems in a parallel computing environment.
Where it is possible that errors may occur they should be detected and
appropriate action taken. Errors may be of two types: fatal errors requiring
program termination; and non-fatal warnings which allow the program to
continue. Both types are passed to a reporting routine ``ereport``, which
takes different actions depending on the value of the error code passed to it
as an argument:

- If the error code is :math:`> 0` an error message will be printed and the
  program will abort (hopefully with a traceback).

- If the error code is :math:`< 0` a warning message will be printed, the error
  code variable will be reset to 0, and the program continues.

- If the error code is 0 nothing happens and the program continues
  uninterrupted.

Both warnings and errors are sent to the ``.pe``\ :math:`n` file *of the
processor generating the warning*, which is stdout for processor 0 only.
Warnings will only appear in stderr if they occur on processor 0. Errors will
always appear in stderr. Note that if a warning occurs on a processor for
which output has been disabled using the print manager settings, then that
warning will not be printed as there will be no ``.pe``\ :math:`n` file to
send it to.

When using ``READ`` or ``OPEN`` or other Fortran intrinsics which deal with IO,
please use both the error status ``IOSTAT`` and the error message ``IOMSG``
arguments, followed by code printing the latter if the former is non-zero. The
``check_iostat`` subroutine provides a convenient way to do this; any non-zero
value of ``IOSTAT`` will cause it to print the return value of ``IOMSG`` and
abort the program.

- The arguments of ``ereport`` are:

  ::

     SUBROUTINE ereport (RoutineName, ErrorStatus,Message)

     CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(IN)     :: RoutineName   ! Name of the calling routine
     CHARACTER(LEN=*), INTENT(IN)     :: Message       ! Error message for output
     INTEGER,          INTENT(IN OUT) :: ErrorStatus   ! Error code

- Ensure the error code variable is set to zero before use. This includes at
  the start of every routine where it is a local variable, and also before
  calling any routine that returns it(``INTENT(IN OUT)``).

- Error messages should contain enough information to *help* the user diagnose
  and solve the problem.

- Avoid splitting error information between stdout (``umprint``) and stderr
  (``ereport``). Keep the details in one place where possible. If the nature
  of the error requires large quantities of additional data in stdout to
  diagnose it properly, make this clear in the error message.

- The variable ``errormessagelength`` in module ``errormessagelength_mod`` is
  provided for declaring the length of ``CHARACTER`` variables to be used with
  error reporting. This provides a longer string for holding e.g. the return
  value of an ``IMOSG`` argument.

- Avoid using a namelist input value or the return code of another routine as
  the error code, especially if you do not know what values it may take. It
  may not be apparent to the user that the problem value is actually the error
  code, or what sign it originally had. Use a dedicated error code and include
  the return code or problematic value in the message itself.

  Common practice:

  ::

     IF (foo /= 0) THEN
       icode = ABS(foo)
       cmessage = 'Invalid input value for foo'
       CALL ereport(RoutineName, icode, cmessage)
     END IF

  Better approach:

  ::

     IF (foo /= 0) THEN
       icode = 10
       WRITE(cmessage, '(A,I0)') 'Invalid input value for foo. Value received: ',foo
       CALL ereport(RoutineName, icode, cmessage)
     END IF

.. _`sec:specific`:

Specific standards
==================

.. _`sec:namelists`:

Runtime namelist variables, defaults, future development
--------------------------------------------------------

The UM reads in a number of run time 'control' namelists; within READLSTA.F90.
Examples are the ``RUN_<physics>`` type namelists. When new science options
are required to be added to the UM the developer is expected to add the new
variable/parameter to the relevant ``RUN_<physics>`` namelist and declaration
in the corresponding module, updating READLSTA.F90 as required.

The use of ``cruntimc.h`` is to be avoided as this approach is being phased out
in favour of suitable modules.

- Code development should use MODULES to define namelist LOGICALS, PARAMETERS
  and VARIABLES (and their defaults) alongwith the NAMELIST.

- It is essential that defaults are set; items within namelists are expected to
  fall into 3 camps:

  - variable never actually changes; it is a default for all users

    - this should be set in the code and removed from any input namelist.

  - variable rarely changes;

    - set identified default within UM code, with comment explaining choice.

    - We advise that these are not included in the namelist. A code change will
      be required to alter it.

  - regularly changes or is a new item and thus no default is yet suitable

    - ``LOGICAL``\ s usually to ``FALSE``

    - variables set to RMDI or IMDI

    - ``CHARACTER`` strings should be set to a default string. For
      example,

      ::

                 aero_data_dir       = 'aero data dir is unset'

An example of preferred practice see ``RUN_Stochastic``. The namelist variables
are all defined within a MODULE, ``stochastic_physics_run_mod.F90``, including
default values.

Defensive input programming
---------------------------

When real or integer values are read into the code by a namelist, the Rose
metadata should either use a values list or a range so that the Rose GUI can
warn the user of invalid values. These values should also be tested in the
code to ensure that the values read in are valid. As it is possible to edit
Rose namelists, or ignore Rose GUI warnings, the GUI should not be relied on
for checking that input values of reals and integers are valid. It may also be
appropriate to check logical values if a specific combination of logicals will
cause an error for example.

The routine, ``chk_var``, is available for developers to more easily check
their inputs. Checks made by ``chk_var`` should match any checks made by Rose,
however checks by ``chk_var`` are made by the code and will by default, abort
the run. Developers should refer to the `um-training
<https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/doc/um/vn\theumversion/um-training/>`__ for
more information on ``chk_var``.

Optimised namelist reading procedures
-------------------------------------

As of UM9.1 the procedure to read UM namelists has been enhanced but this has
implications for the code developer, requiring extra code changes when
adding/removing a UM input namelist item. Tied with each namelist read is now
the requirement for a 'read_nml_routine' usually found in the containing
module of the namelist.

If a coder wishes to add a new variable to a namelist (xxxxxx) then the new
read_nml_xxxxxx subroutine will need changing. The changes required are:

- increment the relevant type parameter by the variable size (for a real scalar
  increase n_real by 1)

- add a new line to the list in the my_namelist type declaration in the
  relevant variable type.

- add a new line to the my_nml population section in the relevant variable
  type

- add a new line to the namelist population section in the relevant variable
  type.

See the UM code for examples.

Unix script standards
---------------------

This standard covers UM shell scripts which are used in the operational suite
as well as within the UM itself. The requirements that this standard is
intended to meet are as follows:

- The script should be easily understood and used, and should be easy for a
  programmer other than the original author to modify.

- To simplify portability it should conform to the unix standard as much as
  possible, and exclude obsolescent and implementation-specific features when
  possible.

- It should be written in an efficient way.

- The structure of the script should conform to the design agreed in the
  project plan.

Scripts are to be regarded as being control code as far as external
documentation is concerned.

Python standards
----------------

Python code used in or with the UM should obey the standard Python style guide
`PEP 8 <http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/>`__. This means that our
Python code will follow the same guidelines commonly adhered to in other
Python projects, including Rose.

C standards
-----------

C code used in or with the UM should conform to the C99 standard
(`ISO/IEC 9899:1999: Programming languages - C (1999) by JTC 1/SC 22/WG 14
<http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_ics/catalogue_detail_ics.htm?csnumber=29237>`__).

Furthermore, it is assumed that any C implementation used by the UM supports
C99 Annex F (IEC 60559 Floating-point arithmetic) i.e. it is assumed the
implementation defines ``__STDC_IEC_559__``. It is also assumed the
implementation provides the optional 8-, 16-, 32-, and 64-bit exact-width
integer types.

Preprocessing of C
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Preprocessing of source files is allowed, as defined by the C99 standard, but
with a few minor exceptions. This use includes - but is not limited to - the
use of ``#include``, macros, ``#pragma``, and ``_Pragma`` statements.

The exceptions are as follows:

- Code must not be dependent on preprocessing to select optional or platform
  specific features in order for it to compile or run. Platform specific and
  optional code are allowed; but this should augment basic functionality
  rather than implment a key component of it. In other words, code should be
  able to compile and run correctly on all platforms without any optional or
  platform dependent macros being defined, even if the code could take
  advantage of them on that platform.

- Platform specific code must be protected by an if-def test on a compiler
  and/or platform specific macro as appropriate. (Examples may include the use
  of ``__GNUC__``, ``__clang__``, ``__linux__``, ``_AIX``, ``__x86_64__``, or
  ``__aarch64__``) This includes the protection of compiler-specific
  ``#pragma``/``_Pragma`` statements.

- If-def tests must not use the ``#ifdef``/``#ifndef`` style. Instead use ``#if
  defined()`` or ``#if !defined()`` as appropriate. This restriction is
  required to simplify the implementation of automated testing.

Code Layout
~~~~~~~~~~~

Rules regarding whitespace, 80 column line widths, prohibition on tab use, and
the use of UK English apply to C code as they would Fortran code. Comments
should use the traditional ``/* */`` style; C++ style comments (``//``) should
be avoided.

Copyright and Code Owner Comments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Copyright and code owner comments follow the same rules as in Fortran, except
with slight modification for the differing comment delimiters in the two
languages — using ``/* */`` instead of ``!``. An example of a compliant
comment header detailing copyright and code owner comments is given below.

.. container:: minipage

   ::


      /**********************************COPYRIGHT***********************************/
      /*            (C) Crown copyright Met Office. All rights reserved.            */
      /*         For further details please refer to the file COPYRIGHT.txt         */
      /*        which you should have received as part of this distribution.        */
      /**********************************COPYRIGHT***********************************/

      /* Code Owner: Please refer to the UM file CodeOwners.txt                     */
      /* This file belongs in section: C Code                                       */

Deprecated identifiers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to the identifiers deprecated by the C99 standard, the following
table lists identifiers which should be considered deprecated within UM code —
and where appropriate, what to replace them with.

========================== ================
**Deprecated indentifier** **Replace with**
========================== ================
``sprintf()``              ``snprintf()``
``strcpy()``               ``strncpy()``
========================== ================

.. _`sec:OpenMPinC`:

OpenMP in C Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible for the runtime libraries used by OpenMP to be incompatible if
different vendors or compiler versions are used for the C and Fortran
compiler. For this reason, whilst use of OpenMP in C code is permitted, there
are some rules governing acceptable use that must be followed.

Protecting OpenMP in C Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OpenMP directives (``#pragma omp``) in C code must be protected by both a
``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS`` and an ``_OPENMP`` ``#ifdef``. This
ensures it is possible to select the use of only the Fortan OpenMP runtime
library if required. If possible, provide a Fortran implementation of the
OpenMP parallelism as well, using the wrappers in the ``thread_utils`` module
from SHUMlib. An example of such use is given below.

.. container:: minipage

   ::


      #if defined(_OPENMP) && defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS)

       /* this branch uses the Fortran OpenMP runtime, via the SHUMlib thread_utils module */
       thread_utils_func();

      #elif defined(_OPENMP) && !defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS)

       /* this branch uses OpenMP pragmas within C */
       #pragma omp parallel
       {
         omp_func();
       }

      #else

       /* this branch does not use OpenMP */
       serial_func();

      #endif

Ideally this should lead to code capable of providing all three possible
runtime outcomes, the use of which are compile-time configurable:

- No OpenMP is used.

- OpenMP is used through the C runtime library. (The compiler defines
  ``_OPENMP``, through the nomal compiler switch selection process.)

- OpenMP is used through the Fortran runtime library, accesed via SHUMlib.
  (The compiler defines ``_OPENMP``; the user defines
  ``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS``)

You must always ensure that the no OpenMP case is possible.

(See also: The SHUMlib documentation on ``shum_thread_utils``)

Other Uses of the \_OPENMP Macro
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The use of the ``_OPENMP`` preprocessor macro for code other than directives is
permitted. This can be used equivalently to how the ``!$`` sentinel would be
in Fortran. A recommended use is to protect the inclusion of the header for
the ``thread_utils`` module, as shown below.

.. container:: minipage

   ::


      #if defined(_OPENMP) && defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS)
      #include "c_shum_thread_utils.h"
      #endif

Or to protect inclusion of the OpenMP header, as shown below.

.. container:: minipage

   ::


      #if defined(_OPENMP) && !defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS)
      #include <omp.h>
      #endif

Further Rules for OpenMP in C
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to standardise the way the above rules are implemented, and to allow
for automated checking of the compliance of code, the following additional
rules are imposed.

- | You cannot hide the use of the ``_OPENMP`` &
    ``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS`` macros through the definition
    of a third macro dependent on them. For example, you must not define
    and use a new macro in place of the two original macros, as shown
    here:
  | \*

  .. container:: minipage

     ::


        #define USE_THREAD_UTILS defined(_OPENMP) && defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS)

        #if defined(USE_THREAD_UTILS)
          thread_utils_func();
        #endif

- If-def tests on ``_OPENMP`` & ``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS``
  must always occur as a pair. You may not test the use of ``_OPENMP``
  or ``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS`` in isolation.

- ``_OPENMP`` must come first in any ``#if defined()`` pair.

- | Any OpenMP ``#if defined()`` pair must not also include a logical
    test on a third macro. If this functionality is required, find an
    appropriate nesting of ``#if defined()`` tests. For example instead
    of:
  | \*

  .. container:: minipage

     ::


        #if defined(_OPENMP) && defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS) && defined(OTHER)
        /* do stuff */
        #endif

  |
  | \* Use:
  | \*

  .. container:: minipage

     ::


        #if defined(_OPENMP) && defined(SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS)
        #if defined(OTHER)
         /* do stuff */
        #endif
        #endif

- You must not use negative logic in an if-def test on ``_OPENMP``
  (i.e. ``#if !defined(_OPENMP)``). Instead, use positive logic and an
  ``#else`` branch. Use of negative logic is permitted for if-def tests on the
  accompanying ``SHUM_USE_C_OPENMP_VIA_THREAD_UTILS`` macro, as this will be
  required to distinguish between cases using the C and Fortan OpenMP
  runtimes.

.. _`sec:reviews`:

Code reviews
============

In order to ensure that these standards are adhered to and are having the
desired effect code reviews must be held. Reviews can also be useful in
disseminating computing skills. To this end two types of code review are
performed in the order below:

#. A science/technical review is performed first to ensure that the code
   performs as it is intended, it complies with the standards and is well
   documented. Guidance for reviewers is found in the `Science/Technical
   Review Guidance
   <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/um/wiki/WorkingPractices/SciReviewGuidance>`__
   page on the UM homepage.

#. A code/system review is performed to analyse the change for its impact,
   ensure that it meets this coding standard and to ensure that all concerned
   parties are made aware of changes that are required. Guidance for reviewers
   is outlined in `Code/System Review Guidance
   <https://code.metoffice.gov.uk/trac/um/wiki/WorkingPractices/CodeReviewGuidance>`__
   page on the UM homepage.

.. _`app:summary`:

UM Software standard summary
============================

The rules discussed in the main text are reproduced here in summary form with
pdf links to the sections.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Standard**                     | **Section**                      |
+==================================+==================================+
| Use the naming convention for    | `S1`_                            |
| program units.                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use your header and supply the   | `S2`_                            |
| appropriately complete code      |                                  |
| header                           |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| History comments are NOT         | `S2`_                            |
| required and should be removed   |                                  |
| from routines.                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Fortan code should be written in | `S3`_                            |
| free source form                 |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Code must occur in columns 1-80  | `S3`_                            |
| (1-100 for CreateBC).            |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Never put more than one          | `S3`_                            |
| statement per line.              |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use English in your code.        | `S3`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| All Fortran keywords should be   | `S4`_                            |
| ALL CAPS while everything else   |                                  |
| is lowercase or CamelCase.       |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Avoid archaic Fortran features   | `S4`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Only use the generic names of    | `S4`_                            |
| intrinsic functions              |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Comments start with a single     | `S5`_                            |
| ``!`` at beginning of line.      |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Single line comments can be      | `S5`_                            |
| indented within the code, after  |                                  |
| the statement.                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Do not leave a blank line after  | `S5`_                            |
| a comment line.                  |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Do NOT use TABS within UM code.  | `S5`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| The use of MODULEs is greatly    | `S6`_                            |
| encouraged.                      |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use meaningful variable names    | `S7`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use and declare variables and    | `S7`_                            |
| arguments in the order           |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use ``INTENT`` in declaring      | `S7`_                            |
| arguments                        |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use ``IMPLICIT NONE``.           | `S7`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use ``REAL, EXTERNAL :: func1``  | `S7`_                            |
| for functions                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Do not use ``EXTERNAL``          | `S7`_                            |
| statements for subroutines       |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| The use of ALLOCATABLE arrays    | `S8`_                            |
| can optmize memory use.          |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Indent code within ``DO`` or     | `S9`_                            |
| ``IF`` blocks by 2 characters    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Terminate loops with ``END DO``  | `S9`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| ``EXIT`` statements must be      | `S9`_                            |
| labelled                         |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Avoid comparing two reals        | `S9`_                            |
| ``IF ( real1 == real2 ) THEN``   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Avoid using 'magic numbers' and  | `S9`_                            |
| 'magic logicals'                 |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Avoid use of ``GO TO``           | `S9`_                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Avoid numeric labels             | `S9`_                            |
|                                  | `S12`_                           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Exception is for error trapping, | `S9`_                            |
| jump to the label ``9999``       |                                  |
| ``CONTINUE`` statement.          |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Continuation line marker must be | `S10`_                           |
| ``&`` at the end of the line.    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Always use an ``ACTION`` when    | `S11`_                           |
| you ``OPEN`` a file.             |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Check for file existence with    | `S11`_                           |
| ``OPEN`` rather than ``INQUIRE`` |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Always format information        | `S12`_                           |
| explcitly within WRITE, READs    |                                  |
| etc.                             |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Ensure that output messages do   | `S12`_                           |
| not use                          |                                  |
| ``WR                             |                                  |
| ITE(6,...)``,\ ``WRITE(*,...)``, |                                  |
| or ``PRINT*``.                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Ensure that output messages are  | `S13`_                           |
| protected by an appropriate      |                                  |
| setting of ``PrintStatus``.      |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Ensure your subroutines are      | `S14`_                           |
| instrumented for DrHook.         |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Only use OpenMP sentinels at the | `S15`_                           |
| beginning of lines ``!$OMP``     |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Be very careful when altering    | `S15`_                           |
| calculations within a OpenMP     |                                  |
| block.                           |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| If possible implement runtime    | `S17`_                           |
| logicals rather than compile     |                                  |
| time logicals.                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Do not replicate (duplicate)     | `S17`_                           |
| runtime logic with cpp logic.    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Do not protect optional          | `S17`_                           |
| arguments with cpp flags, use    |                                  |
| OPTIONAL args instead.           |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Do not use CPP flags for         | `S17`_                           |
| selecting science code, use      |                                  |
| runtime logicals                 |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Use                              | `S18`_                           |
| ``#incl                          |                                  |
| ude "modulename_routinename.h"`` |                                  |
| preprocessing directive for      |                                  |
| reducing code duplication        |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Never use ``STOP`` and           | `S19`_                           |
| ``CALL abort``                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| New namelist items should begin  | `4.1 <#sec:namelists>`__         |
| life as category c items.        |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+



.. _Appendix B:

B. Fortran 2003
===============

The following table provides guidance on which Fortran 2003 features are
welcome for inclusion in the UM.

This has been compiled upon review of `major Fortran compilers
<http://fortranwiki.org/fortran/show/Fortran+2003+status>`__ feature support.

+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| **Feature**             | **Acceptable** | **Comment**             |
+=========================+================+=========================+
| ISO TR 15581            | Yes            |                         |
| Allocatable             |                |                         |
| Enhancements            |                |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Interoperability with C | Yes            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Access to the computing | Yes            |                         |
| environment             |                |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Flush                   | Yes            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| IOMSG                   | Yes            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Assignment to an        | No             | Includes                |
| allocatable array       |                | auto-reallocation       |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Intrinsic Modules       | Yes            | eg ISO_C_BINDING        |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Allocatable Scalars     | Yes            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Allocatable Character   | Yes            | gnu offers partial      |
| lengths                 |                | support.                |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| VOLATILE attribute      | Yes            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Parametrized derived    | No             | Lack of compiler        |
| data types              |                | support                 |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| O-O coding: type        | No             | Not for the current UM, |
| extension, polymorphic  |                | but considered for the  |
| entities, type bound    |                | UM replacement,         |
| procedures              |                | LFRIC-GUNGHO and MakeBC |
|                         |                | replacement CreateBC    |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Derived type input      | No             | Lack of compiler        |
| output                  |                | support                 |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Kind type parameters of | No             | Lack of compiler        |
| integer specifiers      |                | support                 |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Recursive input/output  | No             |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Transferring an         | No             | Prefer to see           |
| allocation              |                | DEALLOCATEs used for    |
|                         |                | code readability.       |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+
| Support for             | No             |                         |
| international character |                |                         |
| sets                    |                |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------+-------------------------+


Dealing with rounding issues.
=============================

Background
----------

The UM perturbation sensitivity project identified coding issues that lead to
excessive perturbation growth in the model. Problems identified included
``IF`` tests that contained comparisons between real numbers; for example
``IF (qCL(i) > 0.0 )`` In this test, ``qCL(i)`` is being used to represent one
of two states;

- "no liquid cloud"

- "some liquid cloud"

This is fine, but it is then important to ensure that rounding issues do not
lead to unintended changes of state prior to the test, such as slightly
non-zero ``qCL(i)`` values when there is supposed to be no liquid cloud. If
such problems occur at discontinuous branches in the code, the result is
spurious perturbation growth.

This appendix collects together some typical examples of what can go wrong, and
how to deal with them. First, though, it is worth making a quick note of some
of the characteristics of floating-point arithmetic.

Floating-point identities and non-identities
--------------------------------------------

In floating-point arithmetic many of the identities that hold in normal
arithmetic no longer hold, basically because of the limited precision
available to represent real numbers. Thus, it is often important that coders
know which algebraic identities pass through to floating-point arithmetic and
which don't, and how results can be affected by the way the calculations are
implemented by the compiler. For chapter and verse on floating-point
arithmetic, a good reference is "`David Goldberg's article
<http://docs.sun.com/source/806-3568/ncg_goldberg.html>`__ "

The following floating-point identity always holds:

::

       0.0 * x = 0.0

The following also hold, but only if the numbers that go into the calculations
have the same precision:

::

       0.0 + x = x
       1.0 * x = x
       x / x = 1.0
       x - x = 0.0
       x - y = x + (-y)
       x + y = y + x
       x * y = y * x
     2.0 * x = x + x
     0.5 * x = x / 2.0

For example, optimisation may lead to some variables being held in cache and
others in main memory, and these will generally store numbers with different
levels of precision. Thus, coding based on these identities will probably work
as intended in most circumstances, but may be vulnerable to higher levels of
optimisation.

The following are non-identities:

::

       x + (y + z) /= (x + y) + z
       x * (y * z) /= (x * y) * z
       x * (y / z) /= (x * y) / z

These say that, unlike in normal arithmetic, the order of the calculations
matters. Failure to recognise this can cause problems, as in example 1 below.
(Note that putting brackets around calculations to try and impose
the "correct" order of calculation will not necessarily work; the compiler
will decide for itself!)

Example 1: Non-distributive arithmetic
--------------------------------------

At UM vn7.4, the routine ``LSP_DEPOSITION`` contains the following
calculation:

::

               ! Deposition removes some liquid water content
               ! First estimate of the liquid water removed is explicit
               dqil(i) = max (min ( dqi_dep(i)*area_mix(i)                 &
        &                /(area_mix(i)+area_ice_1(i)),                     &
        &                qcl(i)*area_mix(i)/cfliq(i)) ,0.0)
   ...
             If (l_seq) Then
               qcl(i) = qcl(i) - dqil(i)  ! Bergeron Findeisen acts first

Here, ``dqil`` is a change to cloud liquid water ``qcl``, which is limited in
the calculation to ``qcl*area_mix/cfliq``, where ``area_mix`` is the fraction
of the gridbox with both liquid and ice cloud, and ``cfliq`` is the fraction
with liquid cloud. Basically, the change to cloud liquid water is being
limited by the amount of liquid cloud which overlaps with ice cloud it can
deposit onto.

In the special case that all the liquid cloud coincides with ice cloud, we have
``area_mix = cfliq``, implying ``area_mix/cfliq = 1.0``. In this case, the
limit for ``dqil`` should be exactly ``qcl``, but is coded as
``qcl*area_mix/cfliq``. In tests on the IBM, it seems that the compiler
decides that the multiplication should precede the division, so the outcome of
the calculation is not necessarily ``qcl``. Thus, the update to ``qcl`` on the
last line does not necessarily lead to ``qcl = 0.0`` when the limit is hit.

One solution to this problem is to supply ``area_mix/cfliq`` directly as a
ratio:

::

           If (cfliq(i) /= 0.0) Then
             areamix_over_cfliq(i)=area_mix(i)/cfliq(i)
           End if
   ...
               ! Deposition removes some liquid water content
               ! First estimate of the liquid water removed is explicit
               dqil(i) = max (min ( dqi_dep(i)*area_mix(i)                 &
        &                /(area_mix(i)+area_ice_1(i)),                     &
        &                qcl(i)*areamix_over_cfliq(i)) ,0.0)

This is the solution we have adopted in the large-scale precipitation code.

Example 2: Changing units when applying limits
----------------------------------------------

At UM vn7.4, the routine ``LSP_TIDY`` contains the following calculation:

::

             ! Calculate transfer rate
             dpr(i) = temp7(i) / lfrcp ! Rate based on Tw excess

             ! Limit to the amount of snow available
             dpr(i) = min(dpr(i) , snow_agg(i)                             &
        &                        * dhi(i)*iterations*rhor(i) )
   ...
             ! Update values of snow and rain
             If (l_seq) Then
               snow_agg(i) = snow_agg(i) - dpr(i)*rho(i)*dhilsiterr(i)
               qrain(i)    = qrain(i)    + dpr(i)

where

::

   dhilsiterr(i) = 1.0/(dhi(i)*iterations)
   rhor(i)       = 1.0/rho(i)

Here, ``dpr`` is a conversion rate from snow into rain, and the second
statement limits this rate to that required to melt all of the snow within the
timestep. Thus, the intention is that if this limit is hit the final snow
amount will come out to exactly 0.0. However, the outcome in this case is
effectively as follows:

::

     dpr(i)      = snow_agg(i) * dhi(i)*iterations*rhor(i)
     snow_agg(i) = snow_agg(i) - dpr(i)*rho(i)*dhilsiterr(i)
               ( = snow_agg(i) &
                 - snow_agg(i) &
                 * dhi(i)*iterations*rhor(i)*rho(i)*1.0/(dhi(i)*iterations) )

In normal arithmetic, the multiplier on the final line comes out to exactly
one, but this is not necessarily the case in floating-point arithmetic.
Whether the expression comes out to exactly 1.0 or not will be highly
sensitive to the values going into the calculation. If the result is slightly
different to 1.0, the outcome is likely to be a tiny but non-zero snow
amount.

The basic problem here is that the limit comes from a particular quantity, but
is being applied indirectly via its rate of change. Thus when the limiting
quantity is updated a change of units is required. The solution here is to
apply the limit to the quantity itself, shifting the change of units to
calculations involving rates:

::

             ! Calculate transfer
             dp(i) = rho(i)*dhilsiterr(i)*temp7(i) / lfrcp

             ! Limit to the amount of snow available
             dp(i) = min(dp(i), snow_agg(i))
   ...
             ! Update values of snow and rain
             If (l_seq) Then
               snow_agg(i) = snow_agg(i) - dp(i)
               qrain(i)    = qrain(i)    + dp(i)*dhi(i)*iterations*rhor(i)

Example 3: Dealing with special cases
-------------------------------------

At UM vn7.4, the routine ``LS_CLD`` contains the following calculation to
update the total cloud fraction ``CF`` given the liquid and frozen cloud
fractions ``CFL`` and ``CFF``:

::

               TEMP0=OVERLAP_RANDOM
               TEMP1=0.5*(OVERLAP_MAX-OVERLAP_MIN)
               TEMP2=0.5*(OVERLAP_MAX+OVERLAP_MIN)-OVERLAP_RANDOM
               CF(I,J,K)=CFL(I,J,K)+CFF(I,J,K)                             &
        &              -(TEMP0+TEMP1*OVERLAP_ICE_LIQUID                    &
        &              +TEMP2*OVERLAP_ICE_LIQUID*OVERLAP_ICE_LIQUID)
   ! Check that the overlap wasnt negative
               CF(I,J,K)=MIN(CF(I,J,K),CFL(I,J,K)+CFF(I,J,K))

During testing, it was observed that ``CF`` was often coming out to
``0.9999999999999....``; i.e., almost but not quite 1.0, and that whether this
occured was highly sensitive to the input data. This sensitivity was then
being passed down to branches testing on, for example, whether ``CF`` was
equal to ``CFF``.

If the above calculations are followed through algebraically, it can be shown
that if ``CFL+CFF >= 1``, then ``CF`` must be exactly one. In the
floating-point case, however, this no longer follows, so we often get cases
where there is a slight deviation from unity. The simplest solution in this
example is to deal with the special case separately:

::

               TEMP0=OVERLAP_RANDOM
               TEMP1=0.5*(OVERLAP_MAX-OVERLAP_MIN)
               TEMP2=0.5*(OVERLAP_MAX+OVERLAP_MIN)-OVERLAP_RANDOM
   ! CFF + CFL >= 1 implies CF = 1
               IF (CFL(I,J,K)+CFF(I,J,K) >= 1.0) THEN
                 CF(I,J,K) = 1.0
               ELSE
                 CF(I,J,K)=CFL(I,J,K)+CFF(I,J,K)                             &
        &                -(TEMP0+TEMP1*OVERLAP_ICE_LIQUID                    &
        &                +TEMP2*OVERLAP_ICE_LIQUID*OVERLAP_ICE_LIQUID)
   ! Check that the overlap wasnt negative
                 CF(I,J,K)=MIN(CF(I,J,K),CFL(I,J,K)+CFF(I,J,K))
               END IF
