.. -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
    (c) Crown copyright Met Office. All rights reserved.
    The file LICENCE, distributed with this code, contains details of the terms
    under which the code may be used.
   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

:html_theme.sidebar_secondary.remove: true
:orphan:

.. _accessibility:

Accessibility statement for the Simulation Systems website
##########################################################

Details on producing an accessibility statement can be found on the `Central
Digital & Data Office government website`_.

This accessibility statement applies to content published on the
`metoffice.github.io/simulation-systems`_ domain.

This website is run by the `Met Office`_. We want as many people as possible to
be able to use this website. For example, that means you should be able to:

- zoom in up to 240% without problems
- change the colours of the site
- navigate most of the website using a keyboard
- navigate most of the website using speech recognition software
- use most of the website using a screen reader on supported browsers
- we've also made the website text as simple as possible to understand

`AbilityNet`_ has advice on making your device easier to use if you have a
disability.

How accessible this website is
------------------------------

We know some parts of this website are not fully accessible:

- some links do not clearly explain where they lead, or that they lead to
  external sites.
- there are some external links to websites that may not be accessible.

Feedback and contact information
--------------------------------

If you need information on this website in a different format like
accessible PDF, large print, easy read, audio recording or braille:

- email ML-Simulation_Systems_and_Deployment@metoffice.gov.uk

We aim to respond to all reasonable requests for accessible information.

Reporting accessibility problems with this website
--------------------------------------------------

We're always looking to improve the accessibility of this website. If you find
any problems not listed on this page or think we're not meeting accessibility
requirements, emailML-Simulation_Systems_and_Deployment@metoffice.gov.uk.

Enforcement procedure
---------------------

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the
Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility
Regulations 2018 (the 'accessibility regulations'). If you're not happy with how
we respond to your complaint, contact the `Equality Advisory and Support Service`_
(EASS).

Technical information about this website's accessibility
--------------------------------------------------------

The Met Office is committed to making this website accessible, in accordance
with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2)
Accessibility Regulations 2018.

Compliance status
-----------------

This website is partially compliant with the `Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines version 2.2`_ AA standard, due to the non-compliances listed
below.

Non-accessible content
----------------------

The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Non-compliance with the accessibility regulations
-------------------------------------------------

- Some links do not clearly explain where they lead, or that they lead to
  external sites. This fails `WCAG 2.1 success criteria 2.4.4 Link Purpose (In
  Context)`_.

Disproportionate burden
-----------------------

- The pages generated by Sphinx contain some duplicate and empty form labels in
  the header. Most are visually hidden but there are some such as the GitHub
  etc. icons by the search field which are visible. This fails `WCAG 2.4.6
  Headings and Labels`_ and `WCAG 3.3.2 Labels or Instructions`_. Sphinx is a
  third-party, open source code base, and so is beyond the scope of this project
  to fix, although we will apply updates as the code base develops.

Content that's not within the scope of the accessibility regulations
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The `Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2)
Accessibility Regulations 2018 legislation`_ does not require us to fix
external, third-party websites that are neither funded nor developed by, nor
under the control of the Met Office.

How we tested this website
--------------------------

We have aimed to use an accessible tool, but we have not formally tested it.
Tests will be carried out by the Simulation Systems and Deployment team. They aim to use the
`WAVE`_ Web Accessibility Evaluation tool, the `lighthouse`_ tool, `axe DevTools
on Chrome`_ tool, and the built-in Chrome and Firefox accessibility dev-tools.

What we're doing to improve accessibility
-----------------------------------------

We always consider accessibility when writing documentation and aim to re-write
inaccessible, complex text as we continue development. This website will be
audited for accessibility at least yearly to highlight potential accessibility
issues.

Preparation of this accessibility statement
-------------------------------------------

This statement was prepared on 24 September 2025. It was last reviewed on 24 September 2025.

.. _Central Digital & Data Office government website:
   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sample-accessibility-statement/sample-accessibility-statement-for-a-fictional-public-sector-website
.. _Met Office: https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/
.. _AbilityNet: https://abilitynet.org.uk/

.. _Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2)
   Accessibility Regulations 2018 legislation:
   https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2018/952/regulation/4

.. _Equality Advisory and Support Service:
   https://www.equalityadvisoryservice.com/

.. _Github issue: https://github.com/MetOffice/simulation-systems/issues/new
.. _metoffice.github.io/simulation-systems: https://metoffice.github.io/simulation-systems

.. _Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.2:
   https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22/
.. _WCAG 2.4.6 Headings and Labels:
   https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/headings-and-labels.html
.. _WCAG 3.3.2 Labels or Instructions:
   https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/labels-or-instructions.html
.. _WCAG 2.1 success criteria 2.4.4 Link Purpose (In Context):
   https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/link-purpose-in-context.html

.. _WAVE: https://wave.webaim.org/
.. _lighthouse: https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/lighthouse/blipmdconlkpinefehnmjammfjpmpbjk
.. _axe DevTools on Chrome: https://www.deque.com/axe/devtools/
